[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: That makes it a subject that more than any other fits this podcast title of the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Barma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My subject
[Amit Varma]: for today is Indian agriculture, one that I've written a lot about over the years. And I've also
[Amit Varma]: done a few episodes of the scene and the unseen on different aspects of it. The most popular of
[Amit Varma]: them was one I did in Hindi with Gunwant Patil, a farmer leader of the Shetkari Sangatana. And all
[Amit Varma]: of these will be linked from the show notes. But I wanted to do a comprehensive one in English
[Amit Varma]: that looks into all the different aspects of agriculture in India and lays bare the many ways
[Amit Varma]: in which the state has been making our farmers suffer for over seven decades. My guests today
[Amit Varma]: are two dear friends of mine who have been writing about the subject for years. Barun Mitra and Kumar
[Amit Varma]: Anand have written many columns and op-eds on the subject, some for me when I was editor of Pragati.
[Amit Varma]: The best pieces will be linked from the show notes. They've both been guests on the show before and I'm
[Amit Varma]: very pleased to invite them back here today. But before we get to our conversation, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break. Did you know that Parsis in Mumbai, instead of being left at the Tower of
[Amit Varma]: Silence after they die, are now cremated? And why? Because a cow fell sick in the early 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that the smog in Delhi is caused by something that farmers in Punjab do and that
[Amit Varma]: there's no way to stop them? Did you know that there wasn't one gas tragedy in Bhopal, but three?
[Amit Varma]: One of them was seen, but two were unseen. Did you know that many well-intentioned government
[Amit Varma]: policies hurt the people they're supposed to help? Why was demonetization a bad idea?
[Amit Varma]: How should GST have been implemented? Why are all our politicians so corrupt when not all of them
[Amit Varma]: are bad people? I'm Amit Verma and in my weekly podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, I take a shot
[Amit Varma]: at answering all these questions and many more. I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen
[Amit Varma]: effects of public policy and private action. I speak to experts on economics, political philosophy,
[Amit Varma]: cognitive neuroscience and constitutional law so that the insights can blow not only my mind,
[Amit Varma]: but also yours. The Seen and the Unseen releases every Monday. So do check out the archives and
[Amit Varma]: follow the show at seenunseen.in. You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever
[Amit Varma]: podcast app you happen to prefer.
[Guest 2]: Varun, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Guest 2]: Hello, good to be back.
[Amit Varma]: Kumar, welcome back to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Happy to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Varun, you know, before we start going sort of point by point about all the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten things wrong with agriculture and many
[Amit Varma]: more than that, actually, I'd like to ask you first to talk about your personal journey on
[Amit Varma]: the subject of Indian agriculture, because, which is relevant to the modern time, because you're
[Amit Varma]: someone who's been involved in this field, not just as a writer and a columnist, but also as
[Amit Varma]: someone who's been on the ground, who's agitated with farmers and so on since the 1990s. And you
[Amit Varma]: were also deeply involved with the first B.T. Cotton Satyagraha of the 1990s. And you're sort
[Amit Varma]: of involved with the current one as well. Take me through the history of that. What was at stake
[Amit Varma]: there? And how did you get interested in agriculture in the first place?
[Guest 2]: I think one was because it was in the mid 90s, India was reforming, liberalization,
[Guest 2]: and India was changing rapidly, and the expectations were very high. And one issue
[Guest 2]: that came up exactly at that point, in the early 90s, was the entry into WTO. And that was a highly
[Guest 2]: and hotly contentious debate for six, seven years. And coming from the perspective of free market,
[Guest 2]: free trade, of course, any opening that the WTO might bring into trade was attractive to us.
[Guest 2]: But what attracted me particularly to agriculture was not just because agriculture, of course,
[Guest 2]: at that time, kind of kept out of WTO. But Sharad Joshi, who was the farmer's leader of the
[Guest 2]: Shetkari and the founder of Shetkari Sanghatana, he was one of India's foremost public figures,
[Guest 2]: who actually campaigned at the grassroots on WTO and opening trade. And in fact, his demand was
[Guest 2]: that agriculture should be included, so that agriculture becomes a normal trading issue.
[Guest 2]: So that kind of first triggered my interest into understanding how does agriculture play out in
[Guest 2]: this global context of reforms and liberalization, because no one else was talking about that.
[Guest 2]: Everyone thought that agriculture is to be kept out and separate. We discussed WTO as trade and
[Amit Varma]: other goods and things. In fact, as both Kumar and you have pointed out, when we liberalized in 91,
[Guest 2]: we liberalized various parts of the economy, but not agriculture at all. At all, exactly. So
[Guest 2]: agriculture was completely set aside. And here was Sharad Joshi, speaking to farmers, talking to WTO
[Guest 2]: officials, including Dunkle when the Dunkle draft was on the ground, that trade must be reformed,
[Guest 2]: and agriculture must be a significant part of that. So that was my first personal introduction
[Guest 2]: to agriculture, because I really had no background in agriculture. But a few years later,
[Guest 2]: and after WTO began and all that, the issue that really attracted me and again,
[Guest 2]: due to Sharad Joshi, because we experienced, particularly in Gujarat, a phenomenon where
[Guest 2]: farmers were allegedly planting an unapproved GM cotton, BT cotton. They didn't even know it was
[Guest 2]: BT because the company that released it didn't claim that it was BT or GM. They just found it
[Guest 2]: to be whatever it was, it did wonders to fight pests. And so in a year when there was a severe
[Guest 2]: pest attack, these other set of farmers found that their crops were standing. And that triggered it
[Guest 2]: all, that was in late 1990s, maybe 98, 99. That triggered a huge upheaval both in the policy
[Guest 2]: segments in Delhi, particularly, and also at the popular farmers level. Because here was a crop
[Guest 2]: that was unapproved. It was released without authorization by a company who didn't have the
[Guest 2]: IPR. So it had the most messiest and murkiest beginning one could think of. But here were
[Guest 2]: farmers who really thought that it was useful. And to the extent and that was to my kind of
[Guest 2]: first introduction to grassroots, to be able to see farmers from Maharashtra, Punjab, Haryana,
[Guest 2]: come down to Gujarat, just to collect a few pods of cotton so that they can extract the seeds and
[Guest 2]: try it out in their farms later on, you know, in the next season. So that kind of triggered my
[Guest 2]: interest that how is it people or farmers who we generally think of as, you know, very inertia
[Guest 2]: bound, difficult to change, live in situations that are very challenging, not really integrated
[Guest 2]: and connected to the rest of the world, yet learned just by sheer word of mouth that here
[Guest 2]: was something different, and something worth trying. That kind of interested me this episode,
[Guest 2]: because it showed me for the first time that policy advocacy need not be from the ivory towers
[Guest 2]: in which I lived. You know, that the advocacy and the policy has relevance on the ground and
[Guest 2]: the stakeholders move, things can change rapidly. And that's exactly what happened in 2002.
[Guest 2]: That in a campaign, in an intense campaign, which barely lasted 10-15 days in March 2002.
[Guest 2]: By 26th March, the government of India had completely reversed its decision and approved
[Amit Varma]: the first GM cotton. I'll quickly give some context for my listeners and kind of bring
[Amit Varma]: them to speed on what happened in the context really is that, you know, all the things that
[Amit Varma]: were wrong with Indian agriculture, we'll of course discuss through this episode. But essentially,
[Amit Varma]: what happened in the late 1970s was this leader called Sharad Joshi, who used to be a civil
[Amit Varma]: servant, and then he had gone abroad. And then he came back to India and he started farming and in
[Amit Varma]: the late 1970s. He was the first farmer leader to number one correctly diagnose what the problems of
[Amit Varma]: Indian agriculture were beyond the immediate proximate problems, what were the deeper
[Amit Varma]: structural problems. And number two, he built a popular movement on the basis of that, which
[Amit Varma]: attracted lakhs and lakhs of farmers. In fact, at one point in time, he even had a rally for female
[Amit Varma]: farmers were more than a lakh female farmers turned up, which was the first of its kind.
[Amit Varma]: And Sharad Joshi's collected writings on agriculture are available in a book called
[Amit Varma]: Down to Earth. And you know, I think you might agree with me on this, you guys might agree with
[Amit Varma]: me that, you know, people often talk about where are the great leaders after independence, all our
[Amit Varma]: great leaders were pre independence, Yogi Gandhi, Nehru Patel, blah, blah, blah. But if I look
[Amit Varma]: through the 20th century, and I think of one Indian political leader, I really admire unreservedly,
[Guest 2]: is Sharad Joshi. I mean, he wasn't a political leader as such. But yeah, I mean, he was unique
[Guest 2]: in the sense that, particularly at a time when there was hardly anyone in India, except a few
[Guest 2]: intellectuals who would, who would bat for reforms and liberalization and a market oriented direction
[Guest 2]: for India. He was the only one who took these ideas to the masses. There is no other leader
[Guest 2]: who took the ideas to the masses, Manmohan Singh surely didn't. And all the others who,
[Guest 2]: who followed Manmohan Singh and the reforms in 1991, no one took it to the masses and Sharad
[Guest 2]: Joshi actually showed the potential if you take the ideas to the people.
[Amit Varma]: And to sort of then come from there to the whole GM thing. The fundamental thing that
[Amit Varma]: Sharad Joshi complained about is that farmers are shackled by the state in every way possible,
[Amit Varma]: which other citizens necessarily aren't. I mean, other citizens were also shackled,
[Amit Varma]: especially before 91, but to a lesser extent, and to a lesser degree. And one of the and we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about all of those ways through the episode. But one of those ways, obviously, was freedom of
[Amit Varma]: choice that farmers weren't allowed to, you know, choose the kind of seeds that they want to use.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what was happening in the 1990s was that there was a crisis in cotton farming, where a
[Amit Varma]: particular kind of pest called the bull worm was destroying cotton crops all across the country.
[Amit Varma]: And they were failing and farmers and everybody essentially, when it comes to livelihood becomes
[Amit Varma]: inventive, creative, they look for ways out. And BT cotton at that time was banned. And one can
[Amit Varma]: understand some of the suspicion of it, even though BT cotton was sort of GMO cotton, which
[Amit Varma]: was used elsewhere in the world, and absolutely no side effects anywhere had been noticed. But
[Amit Varma]: whatever at that point, it was banned. But these farmers said, we don't care if there's a law
[Amit Varma]: against it. If that will save us, we'll do it. And a small group of farmers in Gujarat got hold of
[Amit Varma]: BT cotton seeds from the black market and planted them. And what happened in 2002, at the start of
[Amit Varma]: 2002, is that all cotton crops in Gujarat failed, except the 10,000 hectares that had BT cotton.
[Amit Varma]: So get it every cotton farmer has failed the bull worms have destroyed them, except these guys that
[Amit Varma]: use these particular seeds. What is the government's response to this? The government's response to
[Amit Varma]: this is to turn to these farmers who successfully kept their crops alive and tell them you broke the
[Amit Varma]: law your crops must be destroyed. And at this point, the Shetkari Sangatana in Maharashtra
[Amit Varma]: decided that they are going to stand with their Gujarat colleagues. And along with farmers from
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere, thousands of them started a satyagraha outside mostly outside the eyes of the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: media, went to Gujarat, squatted on the fields and said, No, we will not allow you to destroy these
[Amit Varma]: crops, lobbied the governments and that particular government, the Vajpayee government at the time,
[Amit Varma]: eventually relented and allowed BT cotton to be planted.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, the farmers had actually that week in the last week of March, farmers from Gujarat,
[Guest 2]: Maharashtra, Punjab, Haryana actually came to Delhi with Sharad Joshi with bales of cotton,
[Guest 2]: which was harvested in November, December the previous year, and which were BT. And they went to
[Guest 2]: Ajit Singh, who was then agriculture minister, with all the TV cameras in front.
[Guest 2]: Ajit Singh hesitated even to touch the cotton, because of the so called fear. Firstly,
[Guest 2]: it was illegal. And secondly, he thought his genes will get modified.
[Guest 2]: Exactly. So it was, you know, that was an incredible, incredible experience in terms of
[Guest 2]: bringing about policy change completely outside the ivory tower, in fact, which virtually shook
[Guest 2]: the ivory towers. So to me, that was a huge learning experience, although it took more than
[Guest 2]: 10-15 years for me for this to actually seep down as to what it actually meant. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I've seen a 1999, I think Doordarshan clip of a press conference of the Shedkari Sangatana
[Amit Varma]: or there and there you you are at the mic. Yeah, I said I was in 2000.
[Guest 1]: Varun has a lot of those clips, by the way, especially I like the one where
[Guest 1]: Ajit Singh literally is moving away from, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I haven't seen that one. Is it online somewhere to link for my
[Guest 2]: Online, but it's it. These are, you know, these are all video archival, which we got,
[Guest 2]: so not good quality, but you can still see.
[Amit Varma]: So to bring you up to the present day, I'll give you some more context. After the ban on
[Amit Varma]: BT cotton was lifted, over 90% of Indian cotton farmers today use BT cotton. And because of that,
[Amit Varma]: India has become the world's largest producer of cotton, which it wasn't ahead then,
[Amit Varma]: but we've moved ahead of China. According to Ashok Gulati, who's an expert in agriculture,
[Amit Varma]: the leading expert, our gains from BT cotton have been to the effect of $67 billion in the
[Amit Varma]: year since and both from higher exports and import savings. And cotton farmers income has actually
[Amit Varma]: doubled during this time. Second, what I want to point out is that GMO crops have become standard
[Amit Varma]: across the world. 190 million hectares of GMO crops have been planted worldwide. GMO foods are
[Amit Varma]: accepted in 67 countries. And the third thing I'd like to point out is that the science on this is
[Amit Varma]: completely settled. In all these years, billions of meals, millions of people who have eaten GMO
[Amit Varma]: food, there have been zero harmful side effects. A couple of years ago, 100 Nobel laureates
[Amit Varma]: signed a petition asserting that GMO foods are safe and blasting the anti science NGOs that stood
[Amit Varma]: in the way of progress. And obviously, environmental NGOs will often have their own incentives to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, get the funding coming in and to keep going on over these causes. But the science on
[Amit Varma]: this is pretty much as settled as it is on say climate change, for example. But politics is not,
[Amit Varma]: and we are now in the middle of another Satyagraha. So tell me a bit about that.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, this issue came up, because last 10 years, after the original BT cotton was approved
[Guest 2]: in 2002, the second generation with two genes, it was approved in 2006. So now it's 12 years and no
[Guest 2]: more new kind of seeds have been introduced, new kind of BT cotton seeds have been introduced.
[Guest 2]: 12 years is a long time for these kinds of technologies to last our mobiles, which are
[Guest 2]: information based needs software updates every few months, every few weeks. And the world over
[Guest 2]: in cotton, fourth and fifth generation, BT has already entered the market, whereas we are stuck
[Guest 2]: with the second generation. As a result, the pest problem started growing in the last few years.
[Guest 2]: The production has stagnated over the last few years. And what some farmers found, perhaps it
[Guest 2]: started in 2015-16. But it was discovered in 2017, officially by the government of India,
[Guest 2]: when they did a field survey in the second half of 2017, that 15% of cotton in Maharashtra,
[Guest 2]: Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, which is the kind of Maharashtra is the largest cotton growing
[Guest 2]: state in India. And 9% in Punjab, Haryana, where already a third generation BT cotton, which is
[Guest 2]: called herbicide tolerant BT. That's HTBT. That's HTBT. It's a kind of BT that in addition to pest
[Guest 2]: control, it provides the plant, the cotton plant protection from herbicide, so that the herbicide
[Guest 2]: could be sprayed on the ground to kill the weeds, because the weeds compete with the plant for the
[Guest 2]: nutrition and the water moisture and everything else, and reduces the productivity and the yield
[Guest 2]: of the plant or the main plant, that's cotton. And the cost of doing it, and it has been done
[Guest 2]: traditionally by manual weeding, it is a very time consuming and in the last five, seven years,
[Guest 2]: it has become extremely expensive because labor is in short supply in rural India, particularly
[Guest 2]: labor when you need it, because every farmer needs their field to be weeded around the same time.
[Guest 2]: So, it's almost impossible to find labor. And because of this cost, labor cost in cotton,
[Guest 2]: which in any case is high, which is about 40%. And this weeding was a significant component to
[Guest 2]: it. And some farmers were actually quitting cotton because of this labor cost. So,
[Guest 2]: the herbicide tolerant was introduced about five, six years ago. And today across the world, 60% of
[Guest 2]: cotton is herbicide tolerant, whereas in India, it's not. So, in 2017, it was, you know, there
[Guest 2]: were rumors that maybe some companies have released it without approval or without acknowledging it.
[Guest 2]: But in 2017, Government of India, Department of Biotechnology did this field survey,
[Guest 2]: they haven't released the report yet. But all the media reports indicated that 15% of cotton in
[Guest 2]: Maharashtra were already HTBT. So, the question was that if so many farmers across India in the
[Guest 2]: cotton belt have already tried out the technology, then what is it that needs to be done further
[Guest 2]: to get it approved? And there were two kinds of challenges, particularly regarding HTBT.
[Guest 2]: You know, this was under trial in India by Maico, Monsanto, as a patented technology.
[Guest 2]: But because of two other issues that came up over the last few years,
[Guest 2]: one was the price control. And the second, that is Government of India, on the one hand,
[Guest 2]: didn't want the farmers to have access to genetically modified cotton. On the other hand,
[Guest 2]: wanted farmers to have more access to genetically modified cotton, therefore wanted to reduce the
[Guest 2]: royalty and the fees on cotton. So, that was one part. And the second part was that
[Guest 2]: there was a court case, which actually went to the extent of questioning the validity of
[Guest 2]: IP, intellectual property on genetically modified crops.
[Guest 2]: These two decisions, I think, together in 2016, led to companies withdraw their applications in
[Guest 2]: case of HTBT, which means that today we have a situation where there is no company that has
[Guest 2]: applied for approval and the farmers are already planting it. And therefore, the government can
[Guest 2]: neither approve it, because there's no application, nor can they endorse what is already being
[Guest 2]: planted. So, it is another mess of a different kind than the one we witnessed in 2002. And it
[Guest 2]: is in that context that the Satyagraha came up. The Satyagraha came up because here were
[Guest 2]: a stakeholders whose livelihood was at stake. They, in Maharashtra itself, probably a few lakh,
[Guest 2]: at least two lakh farmers have planted HTBT. There can't be a larger field trial than that.
[Guest 2]: These farmers are planting it on their own fields, taking all the risks on their own.
[Guest 2]: They are not asking for any protection from anybody, neither did they seek price control
[Guest 2]: on seeds, which in any case is just 5% or less for the total cost of farming cotton.
[Guest 2]: So, these farmers were taking risk on their own property
[Guest 2]: for a technology which they believed was useful in the current context.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, the question was, why should they do it surreptitiously?
[Guest 2]: Why should a segment of a population whose extremely resilient, survives in extremely
[Guest 2]: difficult conditions, faces risks at a scale and frequency that none of us would ever imagine,
[Guest 2]: be in this situation of being told that what they are doing is illegal. And therefore,
[Guest 2]: they even went to the extent of Christ naming this cotton as Chor BT. So, our intention was,
[Guest 2]: how do we turn this round? How do we turn the farmers from feeling ashamed of doing something
[Guest 2]: which is legitimate and which is fair, they're doing it at their own cost and trying something
[Guest 2]: new, into something that they could be proud of. And the Satyagraha was an attempt to
[Guest 2]: show to the farmers that this is not you who should be ashamed, it's the policymakers and
[Guest 2]: the politicians who are preventing you, they should be ashamed for creating this situation.
[Guest 2]: So, the Satyagraha was an outcome of that transition, that how do we get to farmers
[Guest 2]: to recognize that what they're aiming for is something to be really proud of,
[Guest 2]: the country should be proud of, that here are the most vulnerable sections of population
[Guest 2]: willing to take this kind of risks. And here's the other, who has no stake in cotton,
[Guest 2]: no stake in agriculture, but have full authority and claim to have the authority to decide
[Guest 2]: whether the farmer should do it or not. So, yeah, so the Satyagraha came about just
[Guest 2]: primarily to instill in the farmers a sense of pride and dignity in what they're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And it should also honestly instill in many elites a sense of shame because you find a lot of elites
[Amit Varma]: having opinions about what farmers should do or should not do, when the fact is that look,
[Amit Varma]: imagine if, like I am a writer, if the government was to tell me that laptops are banned, you cannot
[Amit Varma]: have the latest technology, you must write your pieces by hand and you must deliver it or send
[Amit Varma]: it by snail mail to your editor in Delhi, you know, how would that be? How would it be if they
[Amit Varma]: were to say, no, you can't use air conditioners or even fans, you know, we have the freedom of
[Amit Varma]: choice to buy whatever technology we need, either for our comfort or for our livelihood, but our
[Amit Varma]: farmers who are already oppressed in 100 different ways, which we will discuss, and who are really
[Amit Varma]: the poorest of the poor, and they're not even given that freedom of choice that what should
[Amit Varma]: I invest what little there is of my savings in and to grow whatever I want on my land, and that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of scandalous. And this is this is sort of an ongoing thing right now, right?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, it started in June in Akola district in Maharashtra. And now it's spread beyond
[Guest 2]: Maharashtra. It's covered almost whole of the cotton regions of Maharashtra. Farmers have come
[Guest 2]: out in a way we never expected them to come out. And we shall see how where we progress,
[Guest 2]: we progress, progress with this campaign, because, like I said, HDBT is in a more difficult
[Guest 2]: situation because of its context. But there are other GM crops, which might get approved BT
[Guest 2]: Brinjal being one where virtually everything it has, it has been it has cleared all the
[Guest 2]: regulatory steps that it needed to be. But politics held it back.
[Amit Varma]: I think BT Brinjal was passed in 2009, if I remember, and it was developed by Mahinko,
[Amit Varma]: which is a Maharashtra based company. And it's already been planted in a lot of land in Bangladesh,
[Amit Varma]: and they're doing very well there. But over here, it's not allowed.
[Guest 2]: Correct. And it's been 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: And it's been 10 years.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So it's amazing. And the same thing is happening with with GM mustard,
[Guest 2]: whereas we are importing GM canola oil from Canada. And the technology that is being used
[Guest 2]: in GM mustard by Delhi University, Professor Deepak Pantel is the same technology that they
[Guest 2]: used in canola. So why is it that we can import oil, edible oil developed from canola in Canada,
[Guest 2]: and not allow Indian farmers who have been growing mustard for generations for centuries,
[Guest 2]: have a new kind, new opportunity to improve their production and consumers have more choice in terms
[Guest 2]: of and more reasonable price in terms of and better quality for in terms of what the mustard oil
[Guest 2]: could bring could do to them. So it's, this also has cleared virtually all regulatory steps.
[Guest 2]: But every time it came up before the final regulatory body, somebody would come up and
[Guest 2]: say that we need further tests. And I think I hope we'll get a chance to discuss this whole issue of
[Guest 2]: regulation and testing and underlying so called principle, the precautionary principle and the
[Amit Varma]: and the real mess that it is created. Well, let's talk about it now. And first of all,
[Amit Varma]: the thing to note about genetically modified foods is that all foods are genetically modified.
[Amit Varma]: You know that that's the whole nature through which foods and crops evolve.
[Amit Varma]: All human beings are genetically modified. We are all genetically modified. It's just that now,
[Amit Varma]: technology has advanced to the stage that you can actually control the process and modify them and
[Amit Varma]: specific ways which increase productivity. And you know, one of the things about the
[Amit Varma]: precautionary principle like Taleb keeps going on about the precautionary principle and blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: is that number one has been more than 30 years. And as Kumar pointed out recently,
[Amit Varma]: you know, billions of meals have been served with GMO food is completely safe.
[Amit Varma]: But my fundamental problem apart from that, with the precautionary principle is the precautionary
[Amit Varma]: principle, for example, is also often used to dis say nuclear power, or artificial intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: And my point in all those cases is, and it applies more in the context of GMO,
[Amit Varma]: is that precautionary principle is all well and good. But when applying the precautionary
[Amit Varma]: principle and stopping a technology will cause humanitarian damage, especially to the scale of
[Amit Varma]: what we would see in India, had it not been for, you know, BT cotton earlier and HDBT cotton now,
[Amit Varma]: then that humanitarian cost is too large to ignore. And the precautionary principle can
[Guest 2]: often be taken too far. I think, you know, it's more than the humanitarian cost, which
[Guest 2]: could be you know, a cost benefit analysis. The precautionary principle, in my view,
[Guest 2]: is a fundamental challenge to human civilization as it has grown in the last 2000 years.
[Guest 2]: Because all technology could be stopped using the precautionary principle.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that is because it what it is saying is that unless you are 100% sure that the technology is
[Guest 2]: fine, you shouldn't go ahead with it. The question is, this is a reversal of everything we understand
[Guest 2]: about science as such. Science grows precisely because it is not perfect. That is a step today
[Guest 2]: enables you to take the next step tomorrow. So every step today would have its limitations.
[Guest 2]: And that's the nature of science. Precautionary principle is challenging and questioning the very
[Guest 2]: deep science that they supposed to cherish. You know, that in the name of science, they're
[Guest 2]: destroying the fundamental aspect of science, which is built on a step by step progression,
[Guest 2]: recognizing that every step will carry with it a degree of uncertainty and risk. And therefore,
[Guest 2]: the next step is precise, needed precisely because of that. So precautionary principle
[Guest 2]: is challenging the very, very fundamental premise on which science works, because
[Guest 2]: science doesn't work on certainty, science works on uncertainty. And the second thing is, which is,
[Guest 2]: in fact, that's why I think it should not be called even a principle. Because just think of it.
[Guest 2]: If we assume that we want a principle that will make us completely safe, think of the most unsafe
[Guest 2]: thing that we could probably think of. Every human being is potentially a criminal, which would mean
[Guest 2]: under a precautionary principle, every human being should be either have a police or be in a prison
[Guest 2]: till they can prove that they're innocent. To me, this is a reversal of 2000 years of
[Guest 2]: jurisprudence, which held that man is innocent until proven guilty.
[Amit Varma]: Well, recently, the Modi government did pass something which I retweeted where they are now
[Amit Varma]: saying that the central government can declare anyone they feel like a terrorist and the burden
[Amit Varma]: of proof is not on the state to prove him guilty, but on the person to prove him innocent. And as no
[Amit Varma]: one can prove a negative, if the government says you're a terrorist, you are a terrorist and
[Guest 2]: Barun watch out. But it didn't happen today. It didn't happen today. This has been happening
[Guest 2]: since the 1970s, 80s, particularly when the terrorism acts, the Tadas and all the rest came up.
[Guest 2]: It happened with the dowry issue where the onus of proof shifted. So it's not, you know,
[Guest 2]: so these things didn't happen overnight. But today, the culmination is that this is becoming
[Guest 2]: obvious. It's not just the farmers that are affected. This is an underlying premise that's
[Guest 2]: going to threaten the civilization as we know it today.
[Amit Varma]: Well said. And we'll talk about, you know, the political economy of this near the end of the
[Amit Varma]: episode when I essentially want to talk about the political economy of getting any reform done in
[Amit Varma]: agriculture, which is very complicated and all encompassing. And you've been patiently listening
[Amit Varma]: to all of this so far Kumar and you and I have discussed how it's a joy to just sit and listen
[Guest 1]: to Barun talk about agriculture because there's just so much.
[Guest 1]: For the rest of the recording, we just talk to Barun.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, there's so much passion and insight that one gets from Borunda. Kumar, what I'd like to
[Amit Varma]: sort of ask you to elaborate on is that you had also written a piece for Pragati when I was
[Amit Varma]: editing there very eloquently pointing out how farmers are denied markets, you know, free markets,
[Amit Varma]: the ability to trade freely in every area of their existence from input to outputs, all of it.
[Amit Varma]: Can we start, you know, going through the different ways in which they're denied markets
[Guest 1]: and what the consequences are? Actually, it was much more eloquently,
[Guest 1]: you know, summarized by Barun himself, you know, so various kind of controls which do exist.
[Guest 1]: So I used to deliver a talk earlier on after the global financial crisis in 2008,
[Guest 1]: and used to have this opening kind of query is which is the most regulated industry.
[Guest 1]: And, of course, it comes to banking and finance. But having looked into agriculture last few years,
[Guest 1]: I'm pretty much convinced that probably much more than banking and finance,
[Guest 1]: agriculture, every aspect of it is controlled. So the most regulated and controlled industry
[Guest 1]: in today is definitely agriculture. So all aspects of the trade that you can think of,
[Guest 1]: you know, it is controlled and Barun, please chip in wherever you can, you want. So for example,
[Guest 1]: capital, the first, the capital, the biggest capital that the farmer has, probably the only
[Guest 1]: capital, in some sense is the land. So every aspect of that freedom to buy, sell, rent, or
[Guest 1]: lease land is heavily controlled. And those laws, given having put them into the ninth schedule,
[Guest 1]: are not even, you can't go and talk to them or get it challenged in the Supreme Court.
[Guest 1]: But now there is a PIL, which is, which probably will be taken up and reversed. The second aspect
[Guest 1]: is credit control. So because the capital is under control, and property rights are not very,
[Guest 1]: you know, secure, in our case, the capitalization of the only asset and access to credit
[Guest 1]: is become some circumspect. So the one story that we have in was in Maharashtra, how
[Guest 1]: the land banks, which were shut down, was because land as a collateral was taken by the land banks,
[Guest 1]: who then used to give credit to the farmers. And because the land banks are not allowed in case
[Guest 1]: loans go bad, to dispose of those land, and therefore, you know, make their profits or, you
[Guest 1]: know, as the normal trade would happen, make their money out of it. But so therefore, all the land
[Guest 2]: banks have gone bust. But not just not just because they couldn't dispose. How many farmers
[Guest 2]: in India are in a position to buy extra land? And land ceiling? So who's going to buy the land,
[Guest 2]: even if the banks were allowed to sell it? Particularly when you have the additional
[Amit Varma]: component that only farmers can buy farmland? Correct. So let's actually focus on that. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I done an episode a long time back with Shruti Rajagopalan on the right to property,
[Amit Varma]: where she elaborated on that. And I've done a separate episode on this as well. I think the
[Amit Varma]: very first episode of the scene in the unseen was an agriculture. And this crazy law that we've been
[Amit Varma]: raiding against for a long time is that farmers can't sell agricultural land for non agricultural
[Amit Varma]: purposes. Now, what this basically means is that unless you get a land use certificate change from
[Amit Varma]: the state, and what this basically means is that if a farmer can only sell a piece of land for
[Amit Varma]: agricultural purposes, its value is something because the demand is that much restricted.
[Amit Varma]: But the moment the land use certificate changes and the demand goes up, the price can shoot up by
[Amit Varma]: as much as 40 times. So if you are, for example, if your piece of land is worth two lakhs today,
[Amit Varma]: it can be worth 80 lakhs if it's opened up for industries to buy. And typically how nations
[Amit Varma]: progress is like more than 50% of the Indian population depends on agriculture for a living.
[Amit Varma]: This figure is in single figure percentages across the world, I think in the US is between
[Amit Varma]: four to 8% Europe with single figure percentages. And what happened is that agricultural productivity
[Amit Varma]: goes up, less people are employed, and factories open everywhere industries open. Now there are
[Amit Varma]: different reasons for which we haven't had a manufacturing revolution, a variety of different
[Amit Varma]: laws and restrictions and constraints there as well. But one of them, of course, is that you
[Amit Varma]: can't sell agricultural land for non agricultural purposes. And as Shruti pointed out in her episode
[Amit Varma]: with me, this has also become a big scam, where often what will happen is that the state will
[Amit Varma]: acquire land from the farmer, when the you know, the land can only be used for agricultural purposes,
[Amit Varma]: and they'll change the land use certificate and give it to an industrialist and the land is worth
[Amit Varma]: much more. Like apparently this is this was allegedly how what the whole Robert Wadra scam
[Amit Varma]: of a few years was about that he managed to acquire a lot of agricultural land, got the land
[Amit Varma]: use certificate changed, and sold it for many multiples of what it was worth. I think number
[Guest 1]: I've heard from around is that about 1% of percentage point of GDP is what the money
[Guest 1]: that gets made in by changing just the land use it if I'm not wrong. Yeah, it's it's a it's an
[Guest 2]: unbelievably large amount and which is why we have an artificial scarcity in a sense that you know,
[Guest 2]: you'd every survey in the last 10-15 years have said that farmers want to want to exit.
[Guest 2]: But there is no exit. They are trapped in agriculture. In fact, in state after states,
[Guest 2]: not even not just that they're restricted in selling. They're restricted from becoming landless
[Guest 2]: that if a farmer is registered recognized in as per the land records as a farmer, even if we can
[Guest 2]: sell part of his land, he can never sell all of his land to and become landless, which means that
[Guest 2]: that exit policy that we that the industry and all the rest talks about, they don't realize that the
[Guest 2]: farmers are in a position where they can't even exit when they want to. And 70% of farmers,
[Guest 2]: particularly children of farmers do not want to continue in agriculture. So if they can't exit,
[Guest 2]: where's the capital that's that should have come to them in order to make the transition
[Amit Varma]: going to be available from like firstly, they can't sell the land for non agricultural purposes.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, they're not allowed to sell it to begin with because they can't exit.
[Amit Varma]: Thirdly, even if they could sell it, they would get a fraction of the price unless the land use
[Guest 2]: certificate got changed, which basically ain't gonna happen. There's no market. There's no market.
[Guest 2]: There's no market. That is, there are hardly a part of India where there are farmers willing
[Guest 2]: and able to buy additional farmland. They would rather lease it informally rather than put in
[Amit Varma]: capital to buy it in their name. So what is therefore happening is that the value of this
[Amit Varma]: land is what Hernando de Soto would call debt capital, that the value of this land is completely
[Amit Varma]: wasted, whereas a farmer could have, you know, taken some of this value invested it elsewhere,
[Amit Varma]: you know, reformed his own life, you know, and as both of you have spoken about before many of the
[Amit Varma]: recent jobs agitations really arise in a sense out of this agricultural crisis,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's the party guards of Gujarat or the Jats of Haryana, who are basically landowning
[Amit Varma]: costs. And one of the reasons there is a jobs crisis among them is that as generations go by,
[Amit Varma]: each plot of land gets divided further and further and further till it is completely unsustainable.
[Amit Varma]: And those farmers aren't allowed to even sell the land and exit. And you know, if they were allowed
[Amit Varma]: to, they could make some money off it and, you know, invest it in a better life, however, they
[Amit Varma]: do that, but they can't even do that. So ultimately, you have these political agitations on the streets,
[Amit Varma]: in these cases, taking the form of demands for reservation of jobs. Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And actually, you can see, you know, Kumar was just mentioning about the land banks going bust,
[Guest 2]: you can actually see apart from the land banks, that the structure of agricultural credit,
[Guest 2]: agricultural loan has changed in the last 30 years. In the 80s, the largest chunk of agricultural
[Guest 2]: credit came from what they would say land development, that is long term loans for
[Guest 2]: development of land, which was primarily based on credit given on land. Today, it's completely
[Guest 2]: reversed from two thirds of land development loan, it's now two thirds is on crop loan,
[Guest 2]: which is short term, which means it is extremely risky, because crop is a cycle of three, four,
[Guest 2]: five, six months, and it can fail. Therefore, whereas the credit is, two thirds of the credit
[Guest 2]: is in this risky venture, risky aspect of agriculture, rather than in the capital aspect
[Guest 2]: of agriculture, where it is completely stable, that is on land itself.
[Amit Varma]: And essentially, in this way, farmers are forced to gamble, whereas in another episode I did with
[Amit Varma]: Karthik Shashidhar on futures markets and agriculture, you know, he wrote about how the
[Amit Varma]: state has banned futures markets in agriculture for farmers. And that is actually a great way
[Amit Varma]: where they could hedge some of the risk. And my very first episode of the Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: was with Parvin Srinath and Karthik on corporatization of agriculture. And the point
[Amit Varma]: they made was another thing the state doesn't allow is corporatization of agriculture in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that because they, you know, our policymakers decades ago back in the day used to view companies
[Amit Varma]: with distrust and corporations with distrust. They didn't want large corporations which take
[Amit Varma]: over lots and lots of farmland. But what that forces you to do by banning corporatization,
[Amit Varma]: what it forces you to do is every farmer now has to have two skills. One is farming,
[Amit Varma]: one is entrepreneurship. And you know, to master two skills is very difficult to force every single
[Amit Varma]: small farmer to also simultaneously be an entrepreneur is unfair. It denies farmers
[Amit Varma]: the advantages of scale and of specialization of specialization, division of labor, all of those
[Guest 2]: things. But you know, it has an additional element to it. That is, now the law has in a way been
[Guest 2]: changed. And there were the cooperatives which were supposed to be a farmer's way to scale.
[Guest 2]: Now there are last few years, particularly there is this producer, farmer producer organizations,
[Guest 2]: which in law can be a company or society. But the challenge is, and which is where the key is,
[Guest 2]: you know, that we and the point that we haven't discussed so far that the land issue is not just
[Guest 2]: about the sale part of it, there is a ceiling aspect. Unlike every other sector of the economy,
[Guest 2]: where the first steps of liberalization was to lift the ceiling on capital, you know, we had
[Guest 2]: a famous MRTPC, etc, which were precisely to keep a ceiling on the capital and we knew the price the
[Guest 2]: country paid. Farmers are being told in virtually every state that only so much land is what you can
[Guest 2]: legally own, which means that even if there are talented farmers who are entrepreneurial,
[Guest 2]: and I'm sure there are many given this numbers, they can't, because legally, they cannot acquire
[Guest 2]: land beyond the limit that the state has set in their area. This is a law that doesn't exist for
[Guest 2]: any other sector. We have corporate India raising money from across the world, you know, either debt
[Guest 2]: or equity. The farmer can't even raise it on his own on the land on which he is because firstly,
[Guest 2]: his land has a value which has been undermined. And secondly, there's a scale that he's asked not
[Guest 2]: to cross. So there's a Lakshman Lekha on land ceiling.
[Guest 1]: Srinivas Bhatta After all the private sector going abroad and borrowing and everywhere,
[Guest 1]: including the government of India also wanted to go abroad.
[Guest 2]: Ashutosh Yeah, the sovereign bond.
[Guest 2]: Srinivas Bhatta Everyone wanted to borrow, except for farmers.
[Guest 2]: Ashutosh Except for farmers. I mean, this is the most ridiculous situation that we have created,
[Guest 2]: handicapped, I mean, handicapped in the sense of handicapping their capital. I mean, there can't be
[Guest 2]: a worse form of injustice and inefficiency that we have caused in agriculture only because of this
[Guest 2]: land related issues, both in terms of the valuation of it, as well as in terms of land ceiling,
[Guest 2]: which means that you can't grow, which means that no, there can't be an entrepreneurial farmer
[Guest 2]: who can hope to acquire 1000 hectares or 100,000 hectares.
[Amit Varma]: Srinivas Bhatta And I mean, the tragedy of it is so
[Amit Varma]: all encompassing. There are no, you know, there's no light at the end of the tunnel,
[Amit Varma]: there's no silver lining to this cloud, forgive the cliches, because, you know, a farmer can't
[Amit Varma]: exit farming, a farmer can't grow in farming. And while he is within farming, he can't capitalise on
[Amit Varma]: the value of his land, because that has artificially been kept low with a stupid restriction. What is
[Amit Varma]: the poor fellow to do? Could things get worse? Well, yes, they are much, much worse. And we'll
[Amit Varma]: come to that after a short commercial break.
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 2]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Guest 1]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Unknown]: Hello everyone, welcome to Tech Careers in the New.
[Unknown]: The new podcast series presented by Accenture.
[Unknown]: I'm your host, Shiladitya Mukhopadhyay.
[Unknown]: In this podcast series, we'll get you the latest and greatest
[Unknown]: in the world of technology that's shaping the future of business as we know it.
[Unknown]: We're talking intelligent platforms, cloud, AI, blockchain,
[Unknown]: extended reality, and a whole lot more.
[Unknown]: Every fortnight on Wednesdays, we'll have for you a hot topic
[Unknown]: with expert speakers from Accenture talking about top trends in the space,
[Unknown]: how these are changing the world and creating growth across industries.
[Unknown]: And importantly, we'll tell you how you can learn more,
[Unknown]: build your skills, and expertise to grow and stay relevant in your career.
[Unknown]: Episodes out on the IVM Podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts from.